Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl A. and David Carson.
Chad Oliver has never really been able to devote himself fully to writing science fiction,
though he's been publishing it for over 30 years.
He's also a teacher, a professor of anthropology at the University of Texas at Austin.
As is true with many science fiction authors, Oliver starred as a writer, resulted from
his fascination with reading science fiction.
As a teenager, he discovered Edgar Rice Burroughs and his lush Martian stories and tried to get
his hands on everything Burroughs published.
Because of the addiction to Burroughs, one time when I was in a newsstand I saw a copy
of the big old fat amazing stories.
And it had a cover story by Burroughs called Tiger Girl and also a story by Eando Bender.
You remember him or rather you remember them, Earl and Otto, called Adam Link saves the
world.
Anyway, I bought the copy of Amazing because I wanted to read the Burroughs story and I
figured well I might as well read all this other stuff too.
And there was a story in there by Edmund Hamilton called Treasure on Thunder Moon which I read
and was immediately hooked.
I thought this was the greatest thing I had ever read, maybe the greatest thing anybody
had ever written.
And I decided well by golly the thing to be is to be a professional writer and to write
science fiction.
And I got a second hand portable typewriter and I taught myself to type and I wrote something
every week between the time I was 14 and when I was 21 when I sold my first story.
And sent it all off.
Editors were just immensely helpful.
I never got form rejection slips.
Even at 14 years old you can imagine the kind of junk you were writing at 14.
But people like Sam Merlin for example would write me a little note, you know, we can't
use this but keep trying and so forth.
And in effect what really happened was that I got hooked on science fiction and I just
thought science fiction writers must be gods.
And I wanted to be one.
I figured that's as close to a god as I could get.
So I went at it and I kept writing until I sold my first story and I sold every one
I've written since.
But Oliver was also pursuing an academic career and he took a master's degree in English
from the University of Texas.
His master's thesis was written on magazine science fiction, the first academic thesis
written on that particular subject.
With a degree in English you might have expected Oliver to become an English teacher or a full
time writer of science fiction.
We asked him why he didn't become either.
Actually I was briefly, after I got my MA I taught English at the University for one
year and there were two troubles that were involved in that situation.
From my point of view I don't know what troubles the students had.
But the two troubles were basically that by the time I had started to teach English I
was so much into anthropology that I already knew that that's what I wanted to do.
And I really was just teaching the English because I had told Ransom I would.
And the other aspect of it was there's nothing like teaching freshman English for a year
to convince you that that's not what you want to do for the rest of your life.
So that was the end of it.
I left then went to UCLA to graduate school in anthropology.
I know that doesn't answer the question about why I didn't become a full time professional
writer.
But I'm not sure I can answer that question.
Tony Boucher once said to me, sooner or later you're going to have to choose.
And I never did.
And I suppose that one reason was that I was particularly at that time when I was, you
know, a hundred years younger than I am now.
I was just as interested in anthropology as I was in writing.
And I really wanted to teach anthropology.
And so I tried to do both that was within different success.
More of Science Fiction author, Chad Oliver, next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Chad Oliver has been publishing science fiction for more than three decades.
His novels include Shadows in the Sun, The Winds of Time, The Shores of Another Sea,
and Giants in the Dust.
He's also had a couple of short story collections published, but he's always had to do his
writing in a spare time.
Professional anthropologist.
He teaches anthropology at the University of Texas at Austin.
And he's also chairman of the Anthropology Department.
Actually I was chairman of the Department of Anthropology from 1967 to 1971.
And when I resigned, I swore I would never do it again under any circumstances whatsoever.
And so here I am in the third year of my second chairmanship.
And I figure I've got one year to go.
And then somebody else is going to take over.
And hopefully I can get back to writing not on a full time basis, but I can sure write
more than I can when I'm tied up with the chairmanship.
It's really a full time job.
With a distinguished career at the University, Oliver still spends time writing science fiction.
We have to buy for the money.
No, I really think that writing is something you have to do.
And at any rate, that's the way it is with me.
When I go a certain length of time without writing anything or trying to write something,
I get actually physically uncomfortable with it.
And it's definitely a labor of love.
I think of myself as an anthropologist who occasionally writes a story.
I think that the way to be forever is I really live.
What I am is a writer who got interested in anthropology rather than the other way around.
And it means more to me, I think.
It's more gratifying than anything else.
I just pulled a story.
It's an analog, a story called Ghost Town.
It's going to be out in either September or October, if you will.
And I was thrilled when analog, and it's almost like I'd never told a story before.
And it's infinitely important from the other things when I did.
It's an analog.
Oliver is recognized for his use of anthropology in science fiction,
and it's probably the first science fiction author to do so.
He's even had one of his novels, Shadows in the Sun, reviewed in the anthropology journal.
We estimate the use of anthropology as deliberate.
It's a sound like sound.
But it was certainly nothing that I'd set down and planned.
Like, here's an effective way to teach anthropology that I'm going to do with a three-science fiction.
I really think that the actual proof of the situation is that any writer writes about other things that they know.
And one of the things that I knew was anthropology.
So it's more or less natural.
A fair amount of my writing is rooted in anthropology.
But by no means all of it.
And it's particularly important in the short of the stories that I like the most.
I don't know what anybody else might like about it.
It's kind of a story that you don't have anything to do with anthropology at all.
Although, you know, I don't even go on about this.
I'm just about to rally on.
But at the point of the influence that you can frequently ask much at the same time,
and I'm just going to start with a question.
Among them, what does it mean to be human?
Where are we going and where are we going?
And it seems to me that if you're involved seriously in the field, you tend to fall into the other one.
I would guess, I don't know whether anybody's ever actually counted enough.
But I suppose something like 50% of my writing, perhaps, is rooted directly in anthropology.
But there's a sense that it isn't.
We'll continue talking with Chad Oliver on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Chad Oliver's 1976 Science Fiction novel, Giants in the Dust, illustrates his background in anthropology.
The book is based on an idea of an earth that is stagnant and lethargic.
Everything man wants, he has.
There are no challenges and as a result, no happiness.
A man named Varnum and some companions have their brains wiped clean of all memories,
and they're sent to another planet, uninhabited but earth-like.
The idea is to have mankind start fresh and see if he'll make the same mistakes
or take some alternate evolutionary path.
With that in mind, the humans are left on the planet with no technological aid whatsoever.
Varnum himself is a throwback, a tough hunter who hasn't succumbed to the softness and lethargy of the rest of humanity.
When the humans reach the point, we begin to domesticate animals and practice agriculture.
Varnum's stopping them.
We asked Oliver why.
Wouldn't Varnum's action and effect prevent civilization from developing?
Well actually, the funny thing about giants in the dust, there are lots of funny things about giants in the dust,
including the fact that that's not my title, and I have the faintest idea of what giants in the dust means
in the context of that particular novel.
I called it go back, go back.
But it's about a kind of anthropology that most people are not familiar with.
You know, almost all the anthropology and science fiction comes out really of the old Franz Boas,
Ruth Benedict, cultural relativism position.
And there's a whole new school in anthropology, if you can call it a school,
and not just in anthropology because it gets into sociobiology and all sorts of things,
which states in effect, you know, that there's more to human beings at birth
than just being the traditional tabula rasa that there's some things built in.
And what I was trying to do in giants in the dust or what was going on there
was really to take the old deal about, suppose you took 50 people, 25 male, 25 female,
and you cast them away on the traditional desert island.
What would happen to them if they could somehow survive from infancy and grow into adulthood?
And one possibility that hasn't been considered is that we have a kind of culture building device within us
and that we would recreate a good deal of culture much more quickly than is usually assumed.
And I was playing around with that idea in giants in the dust.
And the reason why Varnum stops these various inventions and things
is because he wants to give it time to unfold to see what will happen.
But you may recall Varnum's the only character in the book who retains any memory.
And at the end of the book, he finally decides that ethically the only thing he can do is to tell him,
tell the other people, tell what he remembers of the culture back on earth,
and to give them a fairer shot at what's going on.
Final occurrences
No, I wasn't. I think you can construct an argument to the effect that people
in other kinds of societies, particularly hunting and gathering societies
societies have some things that we don't have. It's not all one sided. Civilization
is not an unmixed blessing. And people who live in those banned type of societies, they
tend to be freer from stress. They tend to have fewer emotional problems than people
who live in societies such as our own. And so I don't think it's a completely insane
argument to say, you know, maybe we'd all be better off if we were still hunters and
gatherers. But no, it's not a position I would advocate because I don't think it's a, it's
not a realistic proposition outside the world of fantasy.
Morpchett Oliver, next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are
your hosts. This is David Carson in Beryl Lane. In a recent science fiction story, Chet
Oliver raises an interesting question. A man colonized a space, will the human race
split into two separate species, spacers and earthers? The story is entitled, meanwhile,
back on the reservation, and it appeared in the 1981 edition of Analog Magazine. As the
title suggests, Earth becomes sort of a reservation containing the backwash of human culture,
while the other worlds colonized by humans become the progressive mainstream of mankind's
culture. We asked Oliver if he thought such a situation could occur as we move that into
space. I think it's possible. Really, the genesis of,
meanwhile, back on the reservation with two-fold. And one would simply be the kind of reaction
that builds up in you when everybody talks about, hey, you know, here's the glorious
future coming onward to the stars, everybody. When you stop and realize everybody's not
going, and in fact 99.99% of the human population will live and die on this planet, and you've
got to wonder, well, what about them? Are they people too? And it's anthropological,
I think, primarily in the sense of they're in the same boat that so-called primitive
peoples are on this planet today, that the march of culture, for one of another term,
has passed them by to some extent. And they're sort of islands that are left in the stream
and left behind, and yet they have all the problems of living the face that anybody else
does. And I was just trying to raise the question, well, all right, what about the people who
stay behind? Do we just write them off? Are they ciphers, or aren't they just as important
to somebody that goes off to Alpha Centaurus or someplace?
Oliver's been publishing science fiction for over 30 years, and for a good part of that
time he's lived in Austin, Texas, and taught anthropology at the University of Texas.
Oliver goes on to talk about, meanwhile, back on the reservation and reveals some interesting
information about his background as a science fiction writer, and also about science fiction
writers in Texas.
The other thing that was involved in that story was that I had not written any short fiction
in a while, and I got mixed up with the Turkey City group in Austin, which has been a source
of untold joy in my life. And a number of people who were involved in that group, Lisa Tuttle
and Howard Waldrop and a number of others, had urged me to try to do something again,
not wait so long between stories. And meanwhile, back on the reservations, actually the first
story I ever wrote that I submitted to criticism from other writers, and I learned a lot from
them, and it was a very rewarding experience. And I can't tell you what a thrill it is for
me to be living in some place like Austin and to find a whole colony of professional
science fiction writers there, and not just there, but the fact that they're so good.
You know, for something like 20 years, I was all alone in Texas. The closest thing there
was to a science fiction convention or gathering in the old days was when Walt Miller and I
got together for a six pack of beer and Kyle. And this is a brand new experience for me,
and it's comparable only to the situation I was in when I was in Los Angeles in graduate
school. And Ray Bradbury and Chuck Beaumont and Bill Nolan and Dick Matheson and all of
us would get together and talk about stories. But we never criticized each other's manuscripts
in a more or less formal session like that. Instead, you know, somebody would write something
and if there was somebody they liked, they'd take it, hey, look at this, you know, you think
I can do anything with it. And then 20 years more or less by myself, really.
More next time with Chad Oliver.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
The Shores of Another Sea, Chad Oliver's 1971 Science Fiction novel, was partially based
on the author's experience when he did some anthropological research in Africa.
The novel concerns alien contact, a standard science fiction theme. The contact is made
when some aliens land in a remote area of Africa.
And the aliens are very cautious. They don't present themselves to humans. They use baboons
at first, studying them and taking over their bodies in order to approach men without being
detected.
But a man named Royce Crawford, a scientist studying the baboons, becomes aware of the
aliens' presence. He can't go for help though, because a storm washes out the roads and
acylates him from civilization.
We asked Oliver if the setting was based on the time he spent in Africa.
Yes, it was. The Shores of Another Sea is at least rooted in the 17 months or so that
I spent in Kenya and East Africa when I was on a research job with a people called the
Comba. And some aspects of the Shores of Another Sea are real, some are invented, as is true
in any fiction. But to be specific, the storm and the rains and the isolation that form a
major part of the Shores of Another Sea, that all happened. And I was marined for a period
of some weeks at what was, I forget what I called it in the novel, I may even have used
it as a real name, which was the Derajani Research Station. And when those rains came
down, they simply knocked out all communications. And the thought just occurred to me. You know,
suppose you were going to contact this earth and you had to begin somewhere. Would you
really plunk your ship down in the middle of New York City the way they always do? Or
would you try at first in a controllable type of situation where you could deal with small
numbers and related species? And wouldn't it be interesting if you started off with some
other form of primate like a baboon? And that's where the Shores of Another Sea came from.
But if you go back and read the book, or at least if I go back and look at it, what I see
are all kinds of detailed memories of what actually happened in Kenya right down to the
level of the pipe tobacco I was smoking there, which was called Sweet Nut and came in a yellow
tin and was perfectly awful.
At one point in the novel, Royce Crawford has a huge waterbuck in the sights of his rifle. He's
always dreamed of shooting this animal, but he chooses not to. We asked Oliver if Crawford's
decision resulted from his experiences with the aliens. Sure. The scene in which the would-be
hunter finally has a chance to shoot the animal that he's always dreamed about and elects to
let it go free. That's an analog of what is going on in the rest of the book as well, which is
you have an opportunity or you encounter aliens. And if you simply treat them the way one
human being hopefully might treat another under the best of circumstances, maybe this kind of
encounter is going to hold more promise than either a situation where they come out with ray guns
blasting or one where there's some involved Machiavellian plot. The notion that I was really
playing around with there was simply maybe the level of communication is going to have to take
place on the level of look there's some good in us, there's some good in you. Let's try to find the common ground.
This show ends our week with Chad Oliver. If you're interested in further discussions with him, keep
listening to the Science Fiction Radio Show. We'll be talking with him again in the future.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show. Production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.